This is February 22, 1985. We are in the Crowne
Plaza Hotel in Dallas, Texas. This is Bob Cornish,
and I'm interviewing Bob Wegner. Bob, you've been
in the Texas chapter and in Texas for many years.
Why don't you tell us about your beginning in Texas
planning? OK, in 1951,
in the spring, the city of San Antonio held an
election in which they had a referendum adopting
the council manager form of government, as a
consequence of which two things. First, the city,
then 36 square miles, a six mile square, became
much much larger as a result of going to the council
manager form annexation took place on a large
scale secondly the city was staff was reorganized
and professionalized including the
establishment for the first time of a department
of planning both of these things led to my coming to
san antonio and then ultimately to my leaving it
two and a half years later in june of 52 Just after
graduating from Harvard, I was hired by
then-director William O. Parker to be the
assistant director of slum clearance and urban
redevelopment, which the city was undertaking
per its charter provision as a new council manager
city. And it turned out, after about six months and
a suit by some builders or developers or some
similar group in San Antonio, that the charter
provision was not sufficient authority for the
city to get into slum clearance and urban
redevelopment and take advantage of the federal
legislation available for that purpose. that
state and Navy legislation was required. And so
the Office of Slum Clearance and Redevelopment
was abolished. Yes? Bob, do you know who the
planning director before Parker was? According
to my understanding, Bill Parker was the first
planning director under the new council manager
form. And prior to that time, I'm just unaware. I
was led to believe that they did not even have a
planning department prior to that time. So Bill or
Winston Martin would probably be able to tell you
about that. During the six months I was in the slum
clearance redevelopment, as assistant
director, I had the privilege, really, of hiring
the first professional planner that I ever hired,
who happened to be Wolfgang G. Rosler, who is now
the head of the Department of Planning Texas A&M
Urban and Regional Planning. And make that acting
department. Acting department, as much as he had
somewhat, had been in the position for several
years and then left it just to go back to teaching.
And now because of the reorganization going on
there, he is stepping in temporarily to fill that
position. And he did some very fascinating
things. One of the things that he did while he was
there that I remember was, and I worked with him on
it, and then after he left it, he only stayed a very
short time, was to establish census tracts for the
city of San Antonio. That was the first
accomplishment. The 1950 census had been
conducted there without census tracts, and he
outlined a program for formalizing them or
creating them, and then I followed through on the
technical work needed to help achieve that by
using aerial photographs and such and taking the
block statistics and prorating the counts and all
that kind of thing, using some students from
Trinity University in a sociology class there and
a bunch of freedom calculators who actually make
the conversion. And so we gave them their first set
of census tracts, which then stood them in good
stead in 1960. That was the real tangible
accomplishment. The second thing that I worked on
in San Antonio was, after leaving, I went to the
planning department then.
worked on drafting a revision of their zoning
ordinance. Unfortunately, my efforts, I think,
were all for naught. Because in the spring of 53,
partly as a consequence of the first item that I
mentioned at the beginning, the large
annexation, there were a large number of
disgruntled voters in San Antonio who were
exploited by some of the powers that were at the
time, and they were so-called anti-manager
forces, were elected to the council. A man named
White, who was associated with the White Hotel
chain, was their leader, and he had been a council
member previously. Anyway, what happened was
that they wanted to get rid of the manager, C.A.
Harrell, who at that time was the preeminent
manager in the country, having just left some 25
years as city manager in Cincinnati. And CA
Harrell very wisely had a contract that left them
virtually no way to fire him, because there was no
cause to fire him. He had performed ably, and there
was no complaint about his performance. So they
took what choice they did, and that was to reduce
his salary to $1 a year, under which circumstances
he was obliged to resign. And shortly thereafter,
they had a sequence of six city managers in six
months, mainly department heads. Then finally,
they settled down. But in the meantime, they cut
the budget back very drastically. And yours truly
was, at each budget period, getting a little bit
less and a little bit less. So that by the time I left
in the fall of 54, I was earning 20% less than I had
started with. back two and a half years earlier.
While in San Antonio, in addition to Bill Parker,
the assistant director at the beginning was M.
Winston Martin. When the changeover came and
Harrell left, Bill Parker was one of those
department heads who resigned, and M. Winston
Martin became the planning director and remained
such for a long time, and it was largely due to his
support that I was even able to remain as an
employee there at all, given the very tough budget
situation that we had. And I was forever grateful
to him that he did give me that support. Also on the
staff at the time were two other gentlemen who
achieved some prominence later in private
practice in the firm of Mormon, Mock, and Green.
And these were Ed Mock and Bob Green. Ed, I believe,
was an architect by initial training. And Bob
Green was a landscape architect The two of them
eventually teamed up with a fellow named Mormon
and had offices both in San Antonio and Houston and
did some rather outstanding design work. I think
that they still are practicing. The firm still
exists. The name has just recently been changed.
Ed Mock having died within the last two years, and
Bob Green is probably in a semi-retired, if not a
fully retired, state. And I know is enjoying that
very much. Going down to Peru to view the comet in
about a month or two. Right now, maybe. Anyways,
the next association I had with Texas, I left there
right around Thanksgiving or Halloween or
something like that. And my last day in the office,
I recall, I taped a... short program for the APA, or
then the AIP, where I had been scheduled to give a
talk about preparing the planning budget. And I
had to put it onto a dictaphone disk and send it on
since I wasn't going to be able to attend the
session. And that was my last effort at the time to
help support the progression in Texas. Some other
things I did while I was there that I just recall now
was that I went around the state with some
representatives of the state health department
one William Bell, who I believe was an attorney or a
legal counsel for the health department, talking
about and trying to promote the idea of urban
redevelopment. And some of the ideas that were
coming to the fore at that time, some of the federal
housing and home finance agency programs that
cities could use, I went with Mr. Bell and went
around the state talking on two or three or four
occasions. Later on, toward the end of the 50s,
after some very successful work in Tulsa, which
was a kind of a pioneering-type planning city, we
got into a program which involved Fort Worth along
with the metropolitan planning agencies in Tulsa
and Little Rock and Wichita, Kansas, as well as the
city and county of Denver planning agency. This
was a five-way... demonstration project funded
by, I think it was Housing and Home Finance Agency
in the late 50s, to develop a computer, a data
management system, really, using computer
technology. And we call it the Metropolitan Data
Center Project. It went on for some two to three
years. I started out as one of the conceivers of the
project and came to Fort Worth on several
occasions and visited with the staff there. The
director at that time, Mike Mahoney, may remember
who it was because it was a guy who had a civil
engineering background. But the city of Fort
Worth gave excellent support to the program, and
they actually were one of the cities that really
used some of the experience in data management
that we developed in that program. And one of the
other byproducts was a system that eventually was
adopted by HUD as the format for land use systems,
which was the concept of a parcel record, which had
land use as one basic element, structure design as
a second element, and then structure use as a third
element. How does this relate to the work of Al
Gutenberg and his multiple land use
classifications? I think that either they were
parallel Or they were one led to the other. And in
terms of time, I don't know exactly the timing. I do
know that we did use the basic SIC code as the main
one for coding of land use and for structure use as
well. So the exact history of that I'm not that well
acquainted with. But I know that we were either
together or one came just before the other and one
borrowed from the other. HHFA never gave him any
credit for his work. Well, that's very
unfortunate, because apparently, I know that one
of our coworkers in Tulsa had been on the committee
that name was in the booklet that came up with the
harder HHFA land classification system, which
was also endorsed by the highway. Dot. or whatever
it was, the Highway Administration. Well, it was
the Bureau of Public Roads. Bureau of Public
Roads, yeah. Federal Highway Administration.
And that was, his name was Donald, come to me later,
Bond, but he'd also worked with Erling Helland for
a while, and he went up to Kansas City and worked
there. In fact, he even became the director of
planning in Kansas City, and then went into
private practice. The last thing I knew about him,
he was working with some of the underground
storage areas in the old abandoned mines right
outside of Kansas City, or some of us even in the
city, Woodard. His name is Don Woodard,
W-O-O-D-A-R-D, and he was, his name is listed in
that booklet, and he was on our staff when the data
center was going on, that study was going on. Then,
what brought me to Texas was a study done by the
Texas Research League in the mid-60s, about the
time that some forces in Texas, including some in
north central Texas very strongly, including
Tommy Vandegrift were pushing for in Arlington
were pushing for state legislation to authorize
multi-county planning agencies, councils of
governments, and so forth. Was Vandegrift mayor
at that time? He was mayor at that time, yes. He was
mayor for, as you probably recall, some 20 to 25
years, and that was right in the middle or part of
the latter half of that time period. Home years.
Yes. And anyways, Whatever groups, Mr.
Vandegrift and others prevailed upon the
legislature to see the wisdom of adopting a
neighboring legislation for COGS or regional
councils, if they're generically known. And as
part of the foundation of this, I believe, the
Texas Research League entered into a study of
metropolitan planning. And as a part of which,
they came to, or some of their team, came to Tulsa
and interviewed me as, at that time, the director
of planning. And I had taken over from Glenn
Turner, who had succeeded Erling Helland, who was
the first director, back in 53 when it was founded.
And then in 54 or 55, I believe, Turner came on. And
then in 63, I came on. So sometime between 63 and the
end of 66, essentially, probably in 65, people
from the Texas Research League came in and
interviewed me about how was the Tulsa
Metropolitan Area Planning Commission working?
How did that function? And they wanted to use it in
their study of metropolitan planning for Texas.
And there are reports of that study available. And
they were, if not precedent or support for, the
legislation that enabled COGS to be established
in Texas, they at least were part of that same
movement of support. The COGS in Texas were sort of
a remake of the previous economic development
districts, EDDs, that had existed before.
Pursuant to what, some National Resources
Planning Board thing? No, it was after that. But
these were then converted into COGS, likely.
Well, no, let me give you a bit more about that.
Another link that tied me with this, which you may
be familiar with, because our paths first crossed
back in the mid and late 50s when Tulsa was doing a
central business district plan. And you were a
member of the consulting team of Noitre and
Alexander that was doing the plan for the Tulsa
Metropolitan Area Planning Commission. At the
same time, another member of that team was Harold
F. Wise, who had his own consulting firm. And one of
the things that he eventually did was to prepare
plans and work programs for state planning. In
fact, he became the single planner that prepared
more state plans of that type than any other. And
among those that he was working on was Texas. And so
he was instrumental in his own limited way in
having an influence upon the formation of the
state planning regions in Texas, which then
became the home base for each of the COGs. And he did
prepare also, after I came to Texas in January of
67, one year after the North Central Texas COG was
established, he was the man that we hired to
prepare our initial work program. And he foresaw a
budget that none of us would believe at the time. If
we saw a budget of several million dollars, I
believe it was two million dollars in a short
period of time. Well, the way it turned out was
ultimately the budget of the North Central Texas
COG went to ten million dollars, and it also turned
out that the size of the staff increased for the
first, let me see, probably, I'll say roughly ten
years at the rate of one person a month on the
average. The staff was actually, in November of
66, when Bill Pitstick, who was still director,
was hired, through, let's say, 10 years, there
were 120 people on the staff 10 years later. And
Bill and Dan Petty, who was the second person to be
hired, and I, who was the fourth, the third having
been Bill's secretary, Linda Farr at that time,
just couldn't believe that Harold Franklin Wise
was correct in his predictions about how far the
budget would go. As a matter of fact, he turned out
to be conservative, all due, of course, to the
availability of large amounts of federal aids for
not only physical development planning and water
planning and transportation planning, but also
the various kinds of social and health-related
planning and that kind of thing. NCTCOG in the
January of 67. I came in as the director of regional
planning and then did several other things,
including being invited to be active in the AIP at
that time. From the outset of the short course back
in around 1970, due to your, Bob Cornish, your
initiative bringing the idea that you'd worked on
in California to Texas with you, starting this
short course, I was invited to take part in that
from the very, and be on the task force from the very
outset. Frankly, I must admit, during the first
year, my participation was in name I was never able
to get to any of the committee meetings, and there
were three or four years and all that. And it was
only after that that I became active. We paid all
the expenses. Well, be that as it may, maybe I
didn't know that, whatever it was. It was a very,
very busy time at Cog, and it was very demanding
work. And at any rate, we initiated all kinds of new
programs there. I don't know how much of that
history you want me to recount. I should say this.
The Texas Association of Regional Councils has
commissioned a history of regional councils in
Texas, which I believe Jim Ray is preparing. And
this is supposed to be available at the end of this
year, hopefully at the TARC annual conference in
fall, which I believe will be in Galveston. I'm not
sure about them anyways. That will be available to
celebrate the 20th anniversary of the
establishments of COGS in Texas. And so rather
than my trying to take time with that, I'll just
skip that and ask you whether you want me to talk
about the Educational Foundation and the short
course perhaps as a little bit of something else
that I was involved in. Why don't you start first
with the short course and how that got
metamorphosed into the Educational Foundation.
The short course, and again, you were the fellow
that promoted, initiated the idea here, based
upon what you'd done in California. And there is a
paper that I think I provided you a copy with
recently that I found in my file that you wrote
about two years after. I mean, it was late 60s,
something like that. And it recounts part of that
history, and it was based upon, I think, the first
short course that was held in San Antonio. You
actually told the story of that. And the idea here
was that this is a growing state, a state in which
planning is growing. The numbers of professional
planners were rising. The number of cities
undertaking planning, appointing planning
agencies, adopting zoning, et cetera, were
increasing all the time. And Texas, a state that
now has some 1,000-plus cities and then had nearly
that same number, and great demand for planning
and for planning and zoning commissioners, and
precious little background very few
professional planners on the job, and so there was
a great need, a great demand evident to those of us
in the profession for training of local
officials. We thought primarily of planning and
zoning commissioners, but we also included the
city council members and other elected
officials. So that came a little later. Well, but
the idea, but the name was added to the title after
only about two or three years, really. Initially
it was a short course for planning commissioners,
And that, as I say, I've collected a little copy of
the programs, and I don't have all of them, but they
will be completed and become part of the
Foundation archives. And Mike McAnally is going
to help get that all together. And so I also refer
you to the summary, which I have compiled, such as
it is, with the names of the various coordinators
who ran each of the short courses. I really think
that we ought to have the people on the task force as
well as the coordinator. Yeah, the task force
names are going to be on there, too. Yeah, because
they're the ones that initially the idea was to
provide policy. And then the coordinators were to
administer the policy. So it's important to have
those policy centers down there. Well, as a matter
of fact, you read my own mind when you said it.
Because what I did was I tried to make a very brief
summary of the years from 1970 to 71 right through
1985 with both the sites of the short course, the
dates of the short course, the coordinator of the
short course, and the size of the task. All right,
with the short course summary being inserted at
this point, then I would suggest that we talk about
the Educational Foundation. And the impetus for
starting on this was somewhat vague in my mind, but
maybe you can help recall. Well, I think John
Shanahan was the president at the time, and I was
vice president in that chapter. And John, having
had substantial business experience and also
with being a lobbyist, was concerned about the net
proceeds that we were making every year, which
amounted to a couple thousand dollars. And the
question of being tax exempt came up in terms of
income tax. And so after substantial
investigation around Austin with non-taxable
corporations and foundations and so forth,
Shanahan came up with the idea that we ought to
create an educational foundation as an adjunct to
the chapter. And that overlapping directorate so
that it would be a separate entity, but it would be
controlled by the chapter and reflect chapter
policy. And so three of us were signatories to the
creation of the corporation, which then
incorporated. It is an incorporation, as I
understand it. Prior to that time, a name that you
and John and John Cunningham, from then the
director of planning in El Paso, who had been very
active on this, short course task force and had
been chairman of the short course task force for a
couple of years were the, were the incorporators.
The three were required under state law to sign the
articles of incorporation. The articles of
incorporation and the bylaws were prepared by a
short course of an educational foundation task
force, which I volunteered to head. I told John
that was the one thing I was really interested in
doing. somewhere around 1975 that the work
started, and then it culminated in 76. So that was
the actual year of incorporation. And the article
of incorporation, I guess you'd call them, which
is equivalent to the constitution of the body,
remained intact. There'd been no changes in that.
The bylaws had changed slightly and so forth. but
the overlapping terms and the ex-officio offices
which linked the educational foundation, indeed
a separate corporate body, but linked to the
chapter, which itself is incorporated. And part
of the idea of incorporating influenced the
chapter, but the foundation was separate. Why was
it separate? Well, it was separate for one reason.
The chapter's purposes included lobbying, And
the foundations exclude lobbying in purely
research, educational, and maybe moscenary
purposes. It was put in a different tax category
from an IRS point of view. And that was the
reasoning behind it. Yeah, we wanted to make sure
we weren't going to be done by IRS. Yes. And we
invited you and John and John Cunningham to be the
incorporators because of your key roles process
of the short course. And the main thing that the
foundation was charged with doing, and we might
insert in here somewhere, are there the articles
of incorporation in the bylaws? I don't know if the
purposes are cited there, or at least extracts
from them would be appropriate at this point.
Yeah. That would be in the appendix. Yeah. The
short course was definitely the key thing that
they're supposed to do, but all other forms of help
to the educational activities related to
planning in the state, both for lay planners and
professional planners, were included as part of
the legitimate purpose of the foundation. So with
that, I'd ask you what else you'd like me to talk
about. A
quick summary of activity at the Council of
Governments. I was instrumental in the formation
of the initial COG and helped to developed some of
the things that are not planning, per se, but which
became part of the earmuffs of that cog. And that
was the initial annual retreats that were
established there. Some of the annual work
programs that were developed there I had great
inputs to. And some of the things that I personally
developed are still a part of that, the idea of rank
ordering all the cities within the region and that
kind of thing, the idea of comparing size of the COG
with the rest of the country and other states. In
fact, North Central Texas section now has
compared its membership with several other state
chapters and that kind of thing. It's part of the, I
must say, the Texas syndrome of bigger and better
boosterism kind of thing. Well, you've got quite a
role to play in the 1970 census data book for that
North Central Texas COG. Personally, I didn't
have so much that people around my staff did. A lot
of times, inappropriately,
I think that I may have gotten credit for some
things that really people who worked for me were
doing. And indeed, there was a data book that was
developed by COG from the 1970 census and a very
important contribution. And again, it used the
computer technology to develop all these things
and then was replicated in 1980 by COG and his two
urban studies at UT Arlington, once again, the
same kind of thing. And eventually, the number of
people qualified in computer technology that
came onto the staff to do the transportation
planning and to develop the various models for
projecting population and land use became very
sophisticated and much beyond my own
capabilities and experience. But as far as the
data management thing, in fact, I might add that
When in Tulsa, with the Metropolitan Data Center
project, those of us who were involved became some
of the initial, I shouldn't say initial founders,
but some of the founders of the group known as
URISA, the Urban and Regional Information
Systems Association, which now is probably the
preeminent body of its type for city and state and
county and so forth. The brothers at Osborne were
involved in that, weren't they? Osgood. Osgood.
Osgood were on, both of those were on the staff, and
they joined us shortly after. in the late 50s, as I
recall, Don Osgood, the elder, becoming
eventually the director following my stint there
in Tulsa. And the other one, the younger one, he
eventually moved to Texas and was the head of the
North Central Texas section of the APA. He has
since moved back to Tulsa, as I recall, and they may
be in partnership again. But he had gone on to... to
Georgia Tech, got his master's degree on some
facet of airport planning and he'd been working
with